Porting PicoLisp to Cygwin

A few months back, I was looking at Lisp programming language
offerings for the MS Windows environment. I want an interpreter
that is fast and powerful, yet small. I want it to work well in
the Cygwin/Win32 environment.

Enter PicoLisp. http://software-lab.de/down.html

According to the PicoLisp FAQ, "PicoLisp is for programmers
who want to control their programming environment, at all
levels, from the application domain down to the bare metal."
Yes! That's part of what I want a Lisp for. Especially a Lisp I
might embed in other applications. I want control. PicoLisp
looked promising.

PicoLisp is designed with a philosophy of "succinctness",
according to the literature on the site. Although there are
even smaller Lisp interpreters available, PicoLisp seemed to
strike a balance between terseness and functionality.

PicoLisp is written using standard C, and the author
(Alexander Burger) distributes it as C source code under the
GNU General Public License. That means if you want to use
PicoLisp, you'll need to compile it yourself, or otherwise obtain
the executables. PicoLisp comes in two flavours: picolisp, and
an even smaller version: mini picolisp. (More about mini
picolisp in a bit.)

When you do build PicoLisp for yourself, you'll get a
powerhouse of a Lisp including APIs for building web servers,
gui web application servers (for browser clients running java
and/or javascript) integrated relational databases, prolog db
access, and much more. PicoLisp even comes with two example
versions of a flight simulator: one which runs under X-Windows,
the other which uses a client's browser/java for the display.
There's a chess game written in PicoLisp and Prolog.

Lest one think that PicoLisp is a mere toy, consider this. In
2006, PicoLisp won second prize in the German-language C't
Magazine database contest, beating entries written using DB2
and Oracle. Industrial-strength databases with tightly
integrated web applications have been crafted with PicoLisp.
http://tinyurl.com/y9wu39

PicoLisp has some drawbacks and limitations. As the FAQ warns,
PicoLisp "does not pretend to be easy to learn." It is not a
Common Lisp flavor. It is not "some standard, 'safe' black-box,
which may be easier to learn."  Also, for my purposes, I want
software that runs not only on Linux, but also on PCs with the
MS-Windows operating systems. And there was the rub: PicoLisp
isn't distributed with binaries or Windows exe files.

Even worse (for Windows users), PicoLisp wasn't ported to
Cygwin. I have a growing list of portable apps that will run on
a flash drive, many of them I compiled from source from using
Cygwin tools like make, gcc, etc.

Cygwin provides a POSIX emulation layer in the form of
cygwin1.dll and other libraries. This lets a PC running Windows
look like much like a Linux or UNIX box to programs which have
been compiled for Cygwin.  I'd compiled hundreds of programs
for Cygwin and here was PicoLisp which I wanted to have
running on all my PCs, Linux ones as well as the MS-Windows
PCs, too.

So this was beginning to look like a challenge. I'd just take a
little peek at porting PicoLisp to Cygwin, and see how it
would go. I'd ported everything from sox to busybox to fluxbox
to Cygwin, so I felt ready for porting PicoLisp.

PicoLisp comes in two flavors. Mini picolisp and full
picolisp.

Mini PicoLisp is a kind of a "pure" PicoLisp without
system-dependent functions like databases, UTF-8, bignums, IPC,
and networking. This seemed like a good place to start my
PicoLisp porting adventures. I first tried a straight Cygwin/gcc
build, and that worked fine, no hitches.

Then I remembered the -mno-cygwin compiler flag for Cygwin's
gcc. When you compile with -mno-cygwin, gcc causes the
resulting executable to be built without Cygwin dll library
dependances. For C code that relies heavily upon the POSIX
emulation aspects of Cygwin, this might not work. But why not
try building mini picolisp with the -mno-cygwin option?

The C code for mini picolisp is free from Linux/POSIX system
calls, and it compiled with no problems using -mno-cygwin. It
produced a mini picolisp exe file of about 73K, which is not
dependant upon any Cygwin DLLs.

Porting the full PicoLisp interpreter proved to be more of a
challenge. Whereas the mini picolisp was careful to avoid Linux
system calls, PicoLisp takes the opposite approach and uses
Linux (UNIX/POSIX) system functions where needed.

Additionally, PicoLisp has the ability to dynamically load
shared libraries for various extensions.

Since we need to use shared libraries anyway, I wanted for all
of picolisp to go into a single DLL.  Then the picolisp exe
would be a just small stub that uses that the shared library,
picolisp.dll. PicoLisp applications often use fork, so this
should also be more efficient when forking.

Splitting up PicoLisp this way (a DLL and an exe stub) would
allow the picolisp.dll to be used as a Lisp library. As a
shared library, it would then be possible for other
applications to treat PicoLisp as an embedded interpreter,
somewhat like librep, but much smaller and more portable.

Wanting to see how much I could squeeze down the size of the
executables and libraries under Cygwin, I used gcc's -Os
option, which requests that gcc optimize by making the smallest
possible code. Doing this resulted in a picolisp dll of just
150K, and a picolisp exe stub of only 2K.

Of course, if you want this full PicoLisp to run on a Windows
PC which does not already have Cygwin installed, you'll need to
obtain a few Cygwin DLLs which provide the POSIX emulation
layer for PicoLisp.

For the most part, the port to Win32/Cygwin went smoothly.
There were just a few differences between Linux and Cygwin that
were handled with macro ifdef statements in the C code that
allow something to be done differently for the Cygwin
compilation.

In the end it turned out that the biggest problem was the fcntl
system function that does file and record locking. This was
especially frustrating, as time and time again, I thought I'd
found a solution or a work-around to the differences in
semantics of the fcntl call between Linux and Cygwin, only to
have the my "solution" fail with more rigorous testing.

The locking problem was finally just circumvented for Windows
by simply not using fcntl locking. So, there is no file or
record locking for PicoLisp running under Windows. (See the
locking notes in http://www.sqlite.org/lockingv3.html for
another perspective on locking system functions in Windows.)
However, all the example applications run fine, running in a
special (Solo) mode in PicoLisp, in the few places it even
matters. This avoids depending on buggy or non-existent record
locking functionality with the various Windows versions and
file system types.

So, what do we have at this point? PicoLisp is running on the
PC. A working, industrial-strength Lisp interpreter is
PicoLisp, ready for writing applications that are succinct yet
powerful. PicoLisp comes with a Prolog interpreter and
relational databases and flight simulators and chess games and
web servers and chat servers and sendmail and much more.

And PicoLisp itself is written in highly portable C, running
on Linux and Windows. PicoLisp is readily embedable, and will
be useful to add scripting languages (Lisp, Prolog) to other
applications, either statically linked, or as a shared library
(DLL).

PicoLisp is a little dynamo. It even has the ability to use
in-line C code which is compiled on-the-fly into a shared
library. This in-line C ability uses gcc. (And it works with
tcc, the Tiny C Compiler, too.)

With the tremendous number of PCs out there now able to run
PicoLisp, watch out! PicoLisp may be small, but sometimes
very powerful things come in small packages.

Doug Snead, Jan. 2007
